docs/0400|API.md, before:

> We recommend everyone start by [enabling custom chrome formatters](/docs/homebase-react/main/debugging#custom-chrome-formatters) for a much better debugging experience.

![image of custom entity chrome console logs](https://github.com/homebaseio/homebase-react/blob/master/public/images/enable_chrome_formatters_3.png?raw=true)

## `HomebaseProvider`

The HomebaseProvider wraps your React app and makes a relational database accessible to all of your components. Configure it with `lookupHelpers` and `initialData`.

```js
import { HomebaseProvider, useEntity, useTransact, useQuery } from 'homebase-react'

const config = {
  // Lookup helpers are a way to simplify relational queries at query time.
  // The helpers currently supported are:
  // `type: 'ref'` which is a relationship and
  // `unique: 'identity` which enforces a uniqueness constraint 
  // and lets you lookup entities by their unique attributes.
  lookupHelpers: {
    todo: {
      project: { type: 'ref', cardinality: 'one' },
      name: { unique: 'identity' }
    }
  },
  
  // Set `debug` to true in order to access the _recentlyTouchedAttributes attribute on your entities
  //  _recentlyTouchedAttributes shows any cached attributes for a given entity
  // This is helpful for approximating that entity's schema and values
  debug: true,
  
  // Initial data is what it sounds like.
  // It's a transaction that runs on component mount.
  // Use it to hydrate your app.
  initialData: [
    { project: { id: -1, name: 'Do it', user: -2 } },
    { todo: { project: -1, name: 'Make it' } },
    { user: { id: -2, name: 'Arpegius' } }
  ]

  // Or relationships can be specified implicitly with nested JSON
  initialData: [
    { 
      todo: { 
        name: 'Make it',
        project: { 
          name: 'Do it', 
          user: { 
            name: 'Arpegius' 
          } 
        } 
      } 
    }
  ]
}

const RootComponent = () => (
  <HomebaseProvider config={config}>
    <App/>
  </HomebaseProvider>
)
```

## `useEntity` and `entity.get`

Entities are the building blocks of the Homebase data model. They are like JSON objects with bonus features. In particular **you can traverse arbitrarily deep relationships without actually denormalizing and nesting your data**.

```js
// You can get an entity by its id and get attributes off of it.
const [todo] = useEntity(2)
todo.get('id') // => 2
todo.get('name') // => 'Make it'

// Entities with unique attributes can also be retrieved by those attributes.
const [sameTodo] = useEntity({ todo: { name: 'Make it' } })
sameTodo.get('id') // => 2

// And most importantly you can traverse arbitrarily deep relationships.
sameTodo.get('project', 'user', 'name') // => 'Arpegius'
```

## `useTransact`

Transactions let you create, update and delete multiple entities simultaneously. All changes will reactively update any components that depend on the changed data.

```js
const [transact] = useTransact()

// A transaction is an array of nested objects and or arrays.
// Leaving the id blank will create a new entity.
transact([{ todo: { name: 'New Todo', project: 1 } }])

// Setting the id to a negative number is a temp id which 
// allows multiple entities to be related to each other on creation.
transact([
  { project: { id: -123, name: 'New Project' } },
  { todo: { project: -123, name: 'New Todo' } },
])

// Update an entity by including its id.
// NOTE: that only the included attributes will be updated.
transact([{ project: { id: 1, name: 'Changed Project Title' } }])

// To remove an attribute you have to explicitly set it to null.
transact([{ project: { id: 1, name: null } }])

// To delete an entire entity use retractEntity and its id
transact([['retractEntity', 1]])
```

## `useQuery`

Use queries to return an array of entities that meet a given criteria. Our query API is powered by Datalog, but exposed as JSON similar to a JS SQL driver or MongoDB. Datalog is similar to SQL and is incredibly powerful. However, only a subset of features are currently available in JSON.

We will prioritize features based on community feedback so please open an issue if there's something you need. In the meantime you can further filter results with JS `filter()` and `sort()`.

```js
// Finds all todos with a name
const [todos] = useQuery({
  $find: 'todo',
  $where: { todo: { name: '$any' } }
})

// Returns an array of todo entities
todos
.sort((todo1, todo2) => todo1.get('name') > todo2.get('name') ? 1 : -1)
.map(todo => todo.get('name'))
```

## `useClient`

This hook returns the current database client with some helpful functions for syncing data with a backend.

- `client.dbToString()` serializes the whole db including the lookupHelpers to a string
- `client.dbFromString('a serialized db string')` replaces the current db
- `client.dbToDatoms()` returns an array of all the facts aka datoms saved in the db
    - datoms are the smallest unit of data in the database, like a key value pair but better
    - they are arrays of `[entityId, attribute, value, transactionId, isAddedBoolean]`
- `client.addTransactListener((changedDatoms) => ...)` adds a listener function to all transactions
    - use this to save data to your backend
- `client.removeTransactListener()` removes the transaction listener
    - please note that only 1 listener can be added per useClient scope
- `client.transactSilently([{item: {name: ...}}])` like `transact()` only it will not trigger any listeners
    - use this to sync data from your backend into the client

Check out the [Firebase example](https://homebaseio.github.io/homebase-react/#!/example.todo_firebase) for a demonstration of how you might integrate a backend.

## Arrays & Nested JSON

Arrays and arbitrary JSON are partially supported for convenience. However in most cases its better to avoid arrays. Using a query and then sorting by an attribute is simpler and more flexible. This is because arrays add extra overhead to keep track of order.

```js
const config = {
  lookupHelpers: {
    company: {
      numbers: { type: 'ref', cardinality: 'many' },
      projects: { type: 'ref', cardinality: 'many' },
    }
  }
}

transact([
  { project: { id: -1, name: 'a' } },
  { 
    company: {
      numbers: [1, 2, 3],
      projects: [
        { project: { id: -1 } },
        { project: { name: 'b' } },
      ]
    }
  }
])

// Index into arrays
company.get('numbers', 1, 'value') // => 2
company.get('projects', 0, 'ref', 'name') // => 'a'
// Get the automatically assigned order
// Order starts at 1 and increments by 1
company.get('numbers', 0, 'order') // => 1
company.get('projects', 0, 'order') // => 1
company.get('projects', 1, 'order') // => 2
// Map over individual attributes
company.get('numbers', 'value') // => [1, 2, 3]
company.get('projects', 'ref', 'name') // => ['a', 'b']
```

The `entity.get` API is flexible and supports indexing into arrays as well as automatically mapping over individual attributes.

Array items are automatically assigned an `order` and either a `value` or a `ref` depending on if item in the array is an entity or not. To reorder an array item change its `order`.

```js
transact([
  { 
    id: company.get('numbers', 2, 'id'), 
    order: (company.get('numbers', 0, 'order') 
          + company.get('numbers', 1, 'order')) / 2
  }
])

company.get('numbers', 'value') // => [1 3 2]
```

If you need to transact complex JSON like arrays of arrays then you're better off serializing it to a string first.

```js
// NOT supported
transact([{ company: { matrix: [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]] } }])

// Better
transact([{ company: { matrix: JSON.stringify([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]) } }])
JSON.parse(company.get('matrix'))
```

For more information check out the [JSON Derived Relationships blog post](https://homebase.io/blog/homebase-react-0.5.0-json-derived-relationships)

Commit message:

feat(client): add entity and query functions (#93)

docs/0400|API.md, after:

> We recommend everyone start by [enabling custom chrome formatters](/docs/homebase-react/main/debugging#custom-chrome-formatters) for a much better debugging experience.

![image of custom entity chrome console logs](https://github.com/homebaseio/homebase-react/blob/master/public/images/enable_chrome_formatters_3.png?raw=true)

## `HomebaseProvider`

The HomebaseProvider wraps your React app and makes a relational database accessible to all of your components. Configure it with `lookupHelpers` and `initialData`.

```js
import { HomebaseProvider, useEntity, useTransact, useQuery } from 'homebase-react'

const config = {
  // Lookup helpers are a way to simplify relational queries at query time.
  // The helpers currently supported are:
  // `type: 'ref'` which is a relationship and
  // `unique: 'identity` which enforces a uniqueness constraint 
  // and lets you lookup entities by their unique attributes.
  lookupHelpers: {
    todo: {
      project: { type: 'ref', cardinality: 'one' },
      name: { unique: 'identity' }
    }
  },
  
  // Set `debug` to true in order to access the _recentlyTouchedAttributes attribute on your entities
  //  _recentlyTouchedAttributes shows any cached attributes for a given entity
  // This is helpful for approximating that entity's schema and values
  debug: true,
  
  // Initial data is what it sounds like.
  // It's a transaction that runs on component mount.
  // Use it to hydrate your app.
  initialData: [
    { project: { id: -1, name: 'Do it', user: -2 } },
    { todo: { project: -1, name: 'Make it' } },
    { user: { id: -2, name: 'Arpegius' } }
  ]

  // Or relationships can be specified implicitly with nested JSON
  initialData: [
    { 
      todo: { 
        name: 'Make it',
        project: { 
          name: 'Do it', 
          user: { 
            name: 'Arpegius' 
          } 
        } 
      } 
    }
  ]
}

const RootComponent = () => (
  <HomebaseProvider config={config}>
    <App/>
  </HomebaseProvider>
)
```

## `useEntity` and `entity.get`

Entities are the building blocks of the Homebase data model. They are like JSON objects with bonus features. In particular **you can traverse arbitrarily deep relationships without actually denormalizing and nesting your data**.

```js
// You can get an entity by its id and get attributes off of it.
const [todo] = useEntity(2)
todo.get('id') // => 2
todo.get('name') // => 'Make it'

// Entities with unique attributes can also be retrieved by those attributes.
const [sameTodo] = useEntity({ todo: { name: 'Make it' } })
sameTodo.get('id') // => 2

// And most importantly you can traverse arbitrarily deep relationships.
sameTodo.get('project', 'user', 'name') // => 'Arpegius'
```

## `useTransact`

Transactions let you create, update and delete multiple entities simultaneously. All changes will reactively update any components that depend on the changed data.

```js
const [transact] = useTransact()

// A transaction is an array of nested objects and or arrays.
// Leaving the id blank will create a new entity.
transact([{ todo: { name: 'New Todo', project: 1 } }])

// Setting the id to a negative number is a temp id which 
// allows multiple entities to be related to each other on creation.
transact([
  { project: { id: -123, name: 'New Project' } },
  { todo: { project: -123, name: 'New Todo' } },
])

// Update an entity by including its id.
// NOTE: that only the included attributes will be updated.
transact([{ project: { id: 1, name: 'Changed Project Title' } }])

// To remove an attribute you have to explicitly set it to null.
transact([{ project: { id: 1, name: null } }])

// To delete an entire entity use retractEntity and its id
transact([['retractEntity', 1]])
```

## `useQuery`

Use queries to return an array of entities that meet a given criteria. Our query API is powered by Datalog, but exposed as JSON similar to a JS SQL driver or MongoDB. Datalog is similar to SQL and is incredibly powerful. However, only a subset of features are currently available in JSON.

We will prioritize features based on community feedback so please open an issue if there's something you need. In the meantime you can further filter results with JS `filter()` and `sort()`.

```js
// Finds all todos with a name
const [todos] = useQuery({
  $find: 'todo',
  $where: { todo: { name: '$any' } }
})

// Returns an array of todo entities
todos
.sort((todo1, todo2) => todo1.get('name') > todo2.get('name') ? 1 : -1)
.map(todo => todo.get('name'))
```

## `useClient`

This hook returns the current database client with some helpful functions for syncing data with a backend.

- `client.dbToString()` serializes the whole db including the lookupHelpers to a string.
- `client.dbFromString('a serialized db string')` replaces the current db.
- `client.dbToDatoms()` returns an array of all the facts aka datoms saved in the db.
    - Datoms are the smallest unit of data in the database, like a key value pair but better.
    - Datoms are arrays of `[entityId, attribute, value, transactionId, isAddedBoolean]`.
- `client.addTransactListener((changedDatoms) => ...)` adds a listener function to all transactions.
    - Use this to save data to your backend.
- `client.removeTransactListener()` removes the transaction listener.
    - Please note that only 1 listener can be added per useClient scope.
- `client.transactSilently([{item: {name: ...}}])` like `transact()` only it will not trigger any listeners.
    - Use this to sync data from your backend into the client.
- `client.entity(id or { thing: { attr: 'unique value' } })` like `useEntity`, but **returns a promise**. Get an entity in a callback or other places where a React hook does not make sense.
    - The entity returned by this function **will NOT live update the parent React component** when its data changes. If you want reactive updates we recommend using `useEntity`.
- `client.query({ $find: 'thing', $where: { thing: { name: '$any' } } })` like `useQuery`, but **returns a promise**. Perform a query in a callback or other places where a React hook does not make sense.
    - The entities returned by this function **will NOT live update the parent React component** when their data changes. If you want reactive updates we recommend using `useQuery`.

Check out the [Firebase example](https://homebaseio.github.io/homebase-react/#!/example.todo_firebase) for a demonstration of how you might integrate a backend.

## Arrays & Nested JSON

Arrays and arbitrary JSON are partially supported for convenience. However in most cases its better to avoid arrays. Using a query and then sorting by an attribute is simpler and more flexible. This is because arrays add extra overhead to keep track of order.

```js
const config = {
  lookupHelpers: {
    company: {
      numbers: { type: 'ref', cardinality: 'many' },
      projects: { type: 'ref', cardinality: 'many' },
    }
  }
}

transact([
  { project: { id: -1, name: 'a' } },
  { 
    company: {
      numbers: [1, 2, 3],
      projects: [
        { project: { id: -1 } },
        { project: { name: 'b' } },
      ]
    }
  }
])

// Index into arrays
company.get('numbers', 1, 'value') // => 2
company.get('projects', 0, 'ref', 'name') // => 'a'
// Get the automatically assigned order
// Order starts at 1 and increments by 1
company.get('numbers', 0, 'order') // => 1
company.get('projects', 0, 'order') // => 1
company.get('projects', 1, 'order') // => 2
// Map over individual attributes
company.get('numbers', 'value') // => [1, 2, 3]
company.get('projects', 'ref', 'name') // => ['a', 'b']
```

The `entity.get` API is flexible and supports indexing into arrays as well as automatically mapping over individual attributes.

Array items are automatically assigned an `order` and either a `value` or a `ref` depending on if item in the array is an entity or not. To reorder an array item change its `order`.

```js
transact([
  { 
    id: company.get('numbers', 2, 'id'), 
    order: (company.get('numbers', 0, 'order') 
          + company.get('numbers', 1, 'order')) / 2
  }
])

company.get('numbers', 'value') // => [1 3 2]
```

If you need to transact complex JSON like arrays of arrays then you're better off serializing it to a string first.

```js
// NOT supported
transact([{ company: { matrix: [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]] } }])

// Better
transact([{ company: { matrix: JSON.stringify([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]) } }])
JSON.parse(company.get('matrix'))
```

For more information check out the [JSON Derived Relationships blog post](https://homebase.io/blog/homebase-react-0.5.0-json-derived-relationships)
